World War I
drishtiias.com
/printpdf/world-war-i-1
World War I (WW I), also known as the Great War, lasted from 28 July 1914 to 11
November 1918.
WW I was fought between the Allied Powers and the Central Powers.
The main members of the 
Allied Powers
 were France, Russia, and Britain.
The United States also fought on the side of the Allies after 1917.
The main members of the 
Central Powers
 were Germany, Austria-Hungary,
the Ottoman Empire, and Bulgaria.
Causes of the War
There was no single event that led to World War I. The war happened because of several
different events that took place in the years building up to 1914.
The new international expansionist policy of Germany:
 In 1890 the new
emperor of Germany, Wilhelm II, began an international policy that sought to turn
his country into a world power. Germany was seen as a threat by the other powers
and destabilized the international situation.
Mutual Defense Alliances:
 Countries throughout Europe made mutual defence
agreements. These treaties meant that if one country was attacked, allied countries
were bound to defend them.
The 
Triple Alliance-1882
 linking Germany with Austria-Hungary and Italy.
The 
Triple Entente,
 which was made up of Britain, France, and Russia,
concluded by 1907.
Thus, there were two rival groups in Europe.
1/6Fig: Alliances at the beginning of the War
Imperialism:
 Before World War I, Africa and parts of Asia were points of
contention among the European countries because of their raw materials. The
increasing competition and desire for greater empires led to an increase in the
confrontation that helped push the world into World War I.
Militarism:
 As the world entered the 20th century, an arms race had begun. By
1914, Germany had the greatest increase in military buildup. Great Britain and
Germany both greatly increased their navies in this time period. This increase in
militarism helped push the countries involved into war.
Nationalism:
 Much of the origin of the war was based on the desire of the Slavic
peoples in Bosnia and Herzegovina to no longer be part of Austria Hungary but
instead be part of Serbia. In this way, nationalism led to the War.
2/6Assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand:
 In June 1914, Archduke Franz
Ferdinand, the heir to the throne of Austria-Hungary, was shot while he was visiting
Sarajevo in Bosnia. He was killed by a Serbian person, who thought that Serbia
should control Bosnia instead of Austria. Because its leader had been shot, Austria-
Hungary declared war on Serbia. As a result:
Russia got involved as it had an alliance with Serbia.
Germany then declared war on Russia because Germany had an alliance with
Austria-Hungary.
Britain declared war on Germany because of its invasion of neutral Belgium -
Britain had agreements to protect both Belgium and France.
Some of the major battles during the war included the First Battle of the Marne,
Battle of the Somme, Battle of Tannenberg, Battle of Gallipoli, and the Battle of
Verdun.
Phases of the War
The conflict developed on several fronts in Europe, Africa, and Asia. The two main
scenarios were the 
Western front,
 where the Germans confronted Britain, France
and, after 1917, the Americans. The second front was the 
Eastern front
 in which the
Russians fought against Germans and Austro-Hungarians.
After a brief German advance in 1914, the western front was stabilized and a long and
brutal trench warfare started: it was a 
"war of attrition"
 (the western front
remained immovable). Meanwhile on the Eastern Front the Germans advanced but
not decisively.
In 
1917,
 two events changed the course of the war: the 
United States joined
 the
Allies and Russia, after the 
Russian revolution,
 abandoned the conflict and signed
a separate peace.
Finally after the German offensive in the spring of 1918, the Allied counterattack
managed to force a decisive retreat of the German army. The defeat of its Germany’s
allies and the revolution in Germany that dethroned Wilhem II (German Emperor),
brought about the signing of the armistice on November 11, 1918. The Great War was
over.
Consequences of the war
Economic consequences:
 World War I cost the participating countries a lot of
money. Germany and Great Britain spent about 60% of the money their economy
produced. Countries had to raise taxes and borrow money from their citizens. They
also printed money in order to buy weapons and other things they needed for war.
This led to 
inflation after the war.
3/6Political Consequences:
 World War I brought an end to four monarchies: Czar
Nicholas II of Russia, Kaiser Wilhelm of Germany, Emperor Charles of Austria and
the sultan of the Ottoman Empire had to step down.
New countries were created out of old empires. Austria- Hungary was carved
up into a number of independent states.
Russia and Germany gave land to Poland. Countries in the Middle East were
put under the control of Great Britain and France.
What was left of Ottoman Empire became Turkey.
Social Consequences:
 World war changed society completely. Birth rates declined
because millions of young men died (eight million died, millions wounded, maimed,
widows and orphans). Civilians lost their land and fled to other countries.
The role of women also changed. They played a major part in replacing men in
factories and offices. Many countries gave women more rights after the war had
ended, including the right to vote.
The upper classes lost their leading role in society. Young middle and lower
class men and women demanded a say in forming their country after the war.
4/6Treaty of Versailles:
 On June 28, 1919, World War I officially ended with the
signing of the Treaty of Versailles. The Treaty of Versailles was an attempt to prevent
the world from going into another war.
Treaty of Versailles
It is organized in several chapters each having different clauses.
Territorial clauses:
France regained Alsace and Lorraine
Eupen and Malmedy passed into the hands of Belgium
Eastern territories were annexed by Poland which caused East Prussia to become
territorially isolated.
Danzig and Memel, former Baltic German cities were declared free cities
Denmark annexed northern Schleswig-Holstein
Germany lost all of its colonies and the victors annexed them
Military clauses:
Drastic limitation of the German navy.
Dramatic reduction of the Army (only 100,000 troops, prohibition of having tanks,
aircraft and heavy artillery).
Demilitarization of the Rhineland region.
War Reparations:
The treaty declared Germany and its allies responsible for all 'loss and damage'
suffered by the Allies and as a consequence they were forced to pay war reparations
to the victors.
Other Treaties
The Treaty of Neuilly, signed with Bulgaria
The small Balkan country suffered several territorial losses, in the benefit of
Romania, Greece and a brand-new country: Yugoslavia.
The Treaty of Sevres (1920) signed with Turkey
The Treaty of Sevres was extremely hard and led to the Turkish national rebellion,
which was led by Kemal Ataturk. This also led to the war against Greece, which
occupied large areas of Anatolia.
However, the war also brought other important social and ideological changes
5/6The
 U.S.,
 which had won the war but had not experienced the conflict on its territory,
became a first world power.
The mass mobilization of men led to the incorporation of women into the workforce,
which was a major step forward for women's rights.
The triumph of the Soviet Revolution (Russian Revolution) and the social crisis that
followed the
 war encouraged workers
 in many countries to protest, creating a
pre-revolutionary climate.
The extreme nationalism experienced during the war, coupled with fear of a
Communist revolution, encouraged the middle-class populations of some countries
to move to the extreme right. This created a hotbed of fascist movements.
Creation of the League of Nations:
 The League of Nations was an international
diplomatic group developed after World War I as a way to solve disputes between
countries before they erupted into open warfare. A precursor to the United Nations,
the League achieved some victories but had a mixed record of success.
India and WWI
India being a former British colony played a vital role in helping Britain and its allies
win over Germany and allies, a role that is often overlooked.
Being a British colony, the Indian Army contributed a large number of soldiers to the
European, Mediterranean and the Middle East conflicts of war in World War I.
The Indian Army fought against the German Empire in East Africa and also on the
Western Front.
They served in places as diverse as France and Belgium, Mesopotamia, Egypt,
Gallipoli, Palestine and Sinai.
More than 70 thousand of the Indian soldiers who served British in World War I lost
their lives. Sir Claude Auchinleck, Commander-in-Chief of the Indian Army once
said: " Britain couldn't have come through the wars if they hadn't had the Indian
Army."
As high as 100 million British Pounds was given by India to Britain to fund their war
anticipating dominion status and home rule in return.
The British raised men and money from India, as well as large supplies of food, cash,
and ammunition, collected by British taxation policies. In return, the British
promised to award self-rule to India at the end of the war which eventually was not
delivered.
However, the “war to end all wars” turned out to be the opposite. By ensuring Germany’s
economic ruin and political humiliation through the Treaty of Versatile, the post-war
settlement provided fertile ground for World War II.
6/6